---
layout: post
title: day 14 - fear of the next step
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-14
---

Today the coding that I did is not open soruce, and I really don't feel like talking about artificial intelligence today, so this post will be just an essay on the future. 

I don't really know what I want to work with yet. I'm a beginner at several topics. Webdev, software dev, cybersecurity, AI...

I keep broadening my knowledge but I am a little afraid of taking the next step. Doing a big project, biting more than I can chew, and all those things that would make all the difference long term.

I'm loving the steps to become a C developer, and I believe a logical next step is to look towards becoming a language dev, who knows, someday working on Dart, or Rust, or the next big thing. To do that, I probably should learn how to develop a programming language. My own interpreter, compiler, etc...

But I'm afraid of taking up those projects. I feel like I won't be able to finish any project that would take me more than two days, and this would mean my productivity would be worse as an result of trying to do something bigger.

Yet, I keep doing nothing. Not progressing at all. Maybe failing on the right path is better than not trying. I know that, but I also don't know that. My subconscious brain thinks that I should just keep on my comfort zone until the end of the challenge, and maybe until I go to college. 

Part of me thinks about giving up the challenge altogether. I probably will miss a lot of days by the end of the challenge because of the time I'll have to dedicate to applying to U.S. colleges and studying for Brazilian entrance exams. I can't shake the "why bother" thought out of my head, and it makes the challenge much harder.

This is very hard. Writing this post is not easy, no matter how much I want to write it. Both getting out of my comfort zone in my technical knowledge and my writing habit at the same time is definetly more than I can chew. Why didn't I choose to post once every two days???

Well, let's see for how long I can keep this up. Probably I'll do two blog posts on DSA the next two days so I can take a break from learning development stuff, then I will come back with another challenge I'm not qualified to approach and write blog posts I'm not nearly qualified enough to write.

That's all for today.

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-15)
