---
layout: post
title: day 8 - why am i so bad at this
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-8
---

Today I tried to code a netcat-like listener to go together with my reverse shell. In doing so, I encountered the problem that everyone trying project-based learning is bound to encounter eventually: lacking some piece of necessary knowledge. In my case, what I lacked was knowing how to code in C at all. 

I know, shocker, knowing how to code in C is relevant to develop things in C, but I still tried to persist. As you can probably infer by the tone of this post, I failed, very bad.

I kept following [Beej's Guide to Network Programming](https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/html/) (how many times did I link this guide already?) and I coded a simple "hello world" web server by following the tutorial. In the process I ended up copying a bunch of code hoping it would be easy to understand afterwards, as the client-side code was pretty easy.

Then it came time for me to code without the book's help, and it was awful. First things first, I tried to set the stdin, stdout and stderr to be equal to the file descriptor related to the connection between the server and client. Although this is the right move on the client, this doesn't make ANY sense on the server side. 

On the server side, we are supposed to send the inputs through the terminal's input and recieve the output on the terminal. If we set the file descriptor 0, 1 and 2 as the socket file descriptor, we cannot read nor write to through the terminal, so the program is essentially useless.

This took me about half an hour to realize. I'm not very smart.

But this wasn't even the greatest problem. I was completely mistaken on the behavior of the fork() function. I thought it would just create a child process that would start at the beginning of main. This is NOT what happens, and I didn't bother to check if I really knew it because I'm not very smart. 

The actual behavior of fork() is that it creates the child process starting on the line you called the function.

But even knowing that wasn't enough to make a listener. I needed to find a way to handle input and output at the same time. 

I got in a call with a friend of mine who is much better than I am at C programming. When discussing the problems I was having with him, he mentioned the tecnique he used. To check for input and output at the same time, he would make two while loops, something like this:

```
if(!fork()){
    
    while(1){

        // handle input
    }
    exit();
}

if(!fork()){

    while(1){

        //handle output
    }
    exit();
}
```

This technique was all that I needeed to finish the project! But today I'm already too tired. Tomorrow I will finally make my listener in C, and probably pause on the network section on my 100 days of code challenge.

And that's all for today. Tomorrow will be better, at least I hope so, for my sanity's sake.

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-9)