---
layout: post
title: day 10 - what is webassembly
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-10
---

I got to the 10th day! Woohoo! Getting to 10 days of coding every day was expected, but I really thought I couldn't write even half of the blog posts I've written so far. Technical writing is hard! Now I just have to do this again... 9 more times. Send help, please. 

Today I'm going to talk about WebAssembly! This is a nifty tool that allows us to compile from languages like C, C++, Rust and many others for the JS engine inside your browser.

You might ask, "but why, though?"

WebAssembly is very quick. Even though it still has to be decoded by the JS engine, the process of decoding is much faster than parsing JavaScript. For that reason, if you need any computation-heavy program in the browser, like a deep learning trainer or a game, WebAssembly might be the thing you need to kickstart your project.

WebAssembly is an alternative to the tyranny of JavaScript. Not that I have any problems with JS (maybe a little, tbh), but it is nice to have alternatives. Some things are better written in JS, like a short script, and some things are better written in C++, like games.

Not only that, but WebAssembly will allow people to port their code to a web browser in minutes instead of rewriting the whole code in JS. 

In my opinion, WebAssembly is a gamechanger and is moving towards being a standard of web development together with JS. This future excites me, as I kinda like C and I kinda like websites. 

Now that I gave a brief overview of WebAssembly, let's delve deeper into its inner workings. 

If you know about how compilers work, you know that generally a binary is compiled to a specific processor, with its specific architecture and oddities. That's why we usually have to compile the codes ourselves (or a script does that for us) instead of just downloading a binary file. Thus, seeing this .wasm, binary code working on every major browser might seem a bit odd. 

But actually, there is a layer of abstraction between the .wasm and the browsers' JS engine, a WebAssembly, stack-based virtual machine to interpret the binary code. You know how the processor interprets the machine code? A virtual machine is like a software processor. That means the code doesn't have to be compiled to a specific chip, as the VM is portable!

This is INSANELY cool. This implies that a .wasm file is platform-agnostic, and it can actually be run OUTSIDE the browser. WebAssembly permits us to make a binary that will run basically in every environment that supports it and with a speed comparable to binary code coming from C. I can't wait to see the impact that this technology will have in the future of software and web development. 

One thing that we didn't talk about yet is the .wat files. The .wasm files are binary code, which isn't human-readable. (I mean, if you really practice it, I guess it can be human-readable, but I can think of other more exciting side projects.) So no one actually codes in .wasm. (Please don't prove me wrong.) 

But WebAssembly comes with another format that can be compiled to .wasm called .wat, short for WebAssembly Text. This is a human-readable format that represents the binary format. It is actually quite readable, at least when compared to x86 Assembly Language. I probably won't look towards coding directly in WebAssembly Text anytime soon but it is a cool thing to know, and reading it is important to debug WebAssembly binaries. 

This was a bit to take in at once. Next blog post I might look towards compiling a hello world in WebAssembly. I already did that once with emscripten, which is the SDK to compile C to .wasm, but I think it would be fun to try doing that directly with clang. 

If you want to discuss anything, have any corrections or questions about this post, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-11)
