---
layout: post
title: day 21 - chip-8 pt2 - interpreting the chip-8 language
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-21
---

This series of post start on [this post](/blog/100-days-day-22).

The CHIP-8 language has 35 opcodes. (Short for operation codes.) All of these codes are associated with a given operation which we'll emulate with our code. You can read these opcodes [here](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM#2.2).

It is a good learning experience to try to implement these by yourself, so you might want to stay away from this post until you feel stuck in an opcode. With that being said, let's start!

An opcode is composed by 2 bytes, but the memory in which we are going to store the games is composed by 4096, one-byte integers. For that reason, we need to make a function to merge the next two bytes into one opcode. We can do that easily by shifting the first byte 8 bits to the left and summing (or bitwise OR) it with the second byte. My implementation of that function was the following:

```
uint16_t get_opcode(CHIP8 c8){
    
    return (c8->memory[c8->pc]<<8) + c8->memory[c8->pc];
}
```

Great, now we can start creating our function to interpret the next opcode.

We have to start by getting the next opcode, then we have to find a way to deal with all the 35 different opcodes. We could do that using ifs. For example, the CLS opcode is the only opcode that the first byte is 0 and the last byte is also 0. So we could do something like this:

```
if(opcode&0xF000 == 0x0000 && opcode&0x000F == 0x0000){
  
  // do the CLS
}
```

If you don't understand what the bitwise operation '&' is doing in that context, it is just grabbing the information from a set of 4 bits. On hexadecimal notation, every character represents 4 bits, like F represents 1111 in binary.

Let's think about a random collection of 4 bits, like 1010. A bitwise and outputs 1 if two bits are 1 and 0 if they aren't both 1. So 1010&1111 = 1010. But that's not the cool part, the cool part is that when you have, for example, 12 bits after the 1010, you can do this:

```
1010xxxxxxxxxxxx&1111000000000000 = 1010000000000000 
```

And that independs on the value of the numbers following 1010. So by doing &0xF000, we are basically ignoring whatever comes past the first 4 bits.

Ok, that tangent is over, so let's go back to the original problem. We can make the code much tidier if we use switch-case structures instead of ifs. Nesting those makes it easy to read, let's see it in action for the first two opcodes specified on Cowgod's technical specification:

```
void c8_next_op(CHIP8 *c8){

    uint16_t opcode = get_opcode(c8);
    switch(opcode & 0xF000){

        case 0x0000:
            switch(opcode & 0x000F){
                case 0x0000:
                    // do CLS
                    break;
                case 0x000E:
                    // do RET
                    break;
            }
            break;
        case 0x1000:
            ...
}
```

This is a very visual way to deal with separating each opcode and this is the structure I will use to design my interpreter. Feel free to use ifs if you ~are a psycho~ want to. 

Ok, so now we can finally write some opcodes. 

- CLS:

We have to nest switches because the CLS isn't the only opcode that starts with 0, but after separating it from RET, our job is very simple, just memset the memory array to 0 and move on to the next instruction.

```
case 0x0000:
    memset(c8->gfx, 0, sizeof(c8->gfx));
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

Whenever we are not explicitely doing something different with the pc counter, we have to move it over to the next opcode. As opcodes are two bytes long, we have to sum 2 on the program counter.

- RET:

This opcode is identical the "return" statement at the ending of an function. As we always leave the address which we need to return to on the stack, we can use that to go back to the correct line of code.

The implementation is very straight forward, just set pc as the current stack position and remove it from the stack by pointing the stack pointer to the previous element.

```
case 0x000E:
    c8->pc = c8->stack[--c8->sp];
    break;
```

Remember, no pc+=2 because we are explicitely updating it on the operation.

- JP ADDR

Very similar to the RET opcode, but we don't have to care about the stack and we have to select the address directly from the opcode. As it is the only opcode starting with 1, we don't have to nest switch statements.

```
case 0x1000:
    c8->pc = opcode & 0x0FFF;
    break;
```

- CALL ADDR

Here we call a subroutine starting from an specific address. It is analogous to calling a function, if it makes it easier to associate. Just remember to update the stack when doing so!

```
case 0x2000:
    c8->stack[c8->sp] = c8->pc;
    c8->sp++;
    c8->pc = opcode & 0x0FFF;
    break;
```

The next few are similar so I'm going to group them. 

- SE and SNE Vx, byte

These two are the opposite of each other with a very similar implementation. Skipping an instruction is as easy as writing pc+=4 instead of pc+=2 as we normally do. This is the first time we have to mess with the data registers we declared as the V array, exciting!

```
case 0x3000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]==opcode&0x0FF ? 
    c8->pc += 4 : 
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
case 0x4000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]==opcode&0x0FF ? 
    c8->pc += 2 : 
    c8->pc += 4;
    break;
```

Remember to shift the position of the bytes on the position of the array so you don't end up acesssing the position 100000000 instead of the position 1, for example.

- SE Vx, Vy

The same as above, but extra spicy because we have to compare two data registers. Remember to shift the position differently as Vx and Vy are in different places of the opcode. 

```
case 0x5000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]==c8->V[opcode&0x00F0>>4] ? 
    c8->pc += 4 : 
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

- LD Vx, byte 

Remember SE, VX, byte? Remove one equal sign and remove the conditional bit.

```
case 0x6000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] = opcode&0xFF;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

- ADD Vx, byte

Remember the opcode above? Add a plus sign behind the equal sign.

```
case 0x7000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] += opcode&0x0FF;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

I think that's enough for today, isn't it? Let's leave the rest for tomorrow! That's actually a lie, no way I finish this tomorrow. Too many opcodes left, and the ones starting with F are mega spicy.

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-22)
