---
layout: post
title: day 12 - webassembly - compiling c to .wasm
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-12
---

Ok, so I did not find any tutorial I liked on how to compile C code to .wasm using emscripten, so I guess it's time to make my own. No weirdly long .html files here, just the barebones. 

First things first, make sure you're in an unix operational system. (sorry windows users, I'm not smart enough to decipher your weird OS.) 

Install [emsdk](https://emscripten.org/docs/getting_started/downloads.html). This is the tool we're going to use to compile our code. 

For some reason they don't teach how to add any of the commands to the path environment variable permanently, so every time you close and open your terminal, you'll have to do the ```source ./path/to/emsdk_env.sh``` command again. To not have to put the whole path or go to the folder you installed emsdk all the time, add the following line of code to the configs of your shell (~/.bashrc if bash, ~/.zshrc if zsh, you'll figure out if other shell)

```
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/emsdk_env.sh
```

I'm sure there is a good reason for them to not teach that to us. Probably so we remember to use ```git pull``` on the folder every time we use the program. But I'm lazy so I added permanently to the path variable. So everytime I want to use emsdk, I just run ```source emsdk_env.sh``` from any folder.

Ok, off-topic section over, let's go back to business. 

Now that we've installed emsdk, let's start by making a simple code in C to test it. Let's call it code.c:

```
#include <stdio.h>

int add(void){

    printf("%d + %d = %d/n" 20, 30, 40);
}

int main(){

    printf("hello world!/n");
}
```

If you're wondering why the math is wrong, it was a typo at first but I left it this way. Who's to say the "+" glyph means addition?

Great, so now let's compile it. 

```
emcc -o output.js code.c
```

Success! We now have a working .wasm bytecode and a monstrocity of a 2000 lines .js file! It is the glue code that does all sorts of fun stuff for us, like implementing the syscalls. Thankfully, we can just not read the output.js file so we are alright. 

NOTE: I know you can use ```emcc -o output.html code .c``` to automatically create a webpage to test it, but I really think it is counterproductive to see a 1000-lines html code instead of a 10-lines, readable one we can write. 

Now let's create the html file that will run the .js glue script. Lets call it site.html. 

```
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html>
    <body>
        <script src="output.js"></script>
        <button onclick = "ccall('add')">click me!</button>
    </body>
<html
```

That is some pretty hardcore piece of web development.

We included the output.js script, which will make the communication between our html/js code and our output.wasm binary file. This allowed us to call the function ccall(), which is defined inside output.js and recieves a string with the name of the function you wish to call. Very cool. You can even pass arguments this way: ```ccall('add', [10, 20])``` But our very epic add function accepts no arguments. 

Now let's run it! We just have to open a web server with python inside the folder in which we wrote these files. It only takes one line of code on the terminal.

```
python3 -m http.server
```

If you're wondering why not just opening the .html file directly, I'm not so sure. I will not pretend I'm a very knowledgeable web developer. But I know that somethings, like AJAX requests won't work on the file:// protocol. The output.js file must use some things that only work on web servers.

Now we just have to open on our browser localhost:8000/site.html and see the magic happening. And, sure enough, as soon as I open my console, I can see the following string. 

```
hello world!
```

But as soon as I click the happy little "click me!" button, I get the following error.

```
Uncaught RuntimeError: Aborted(Assertion failed: Cannot call unknown function add, make sure it is exported)
```

You've fallen for my trap, I convinced you to write buggy code! Now you'll never break into tech!

Just kidding. This error is useful to learn something. When compiling C code that way, the compiler cuts out every function besides main as dead code, so you cannot use them. The compiler is mean like that. Thankfully, there is an easy fix. 

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <emscripten.h>

#ifdef __cplusplus // if for some reason my code is run in C++.
extern "C" {
#endif

EMSCRIPTEN_KEEPALIVE int add(void){

    printf("%d + %d = %d\n", 20, 30, 40);
    return 0;
}

#ifdef __cplusplus
}
#endif

int main(){
    printf("hello world!\n");
}
```

Now we stopped the compiler from deleting our function! We included the emscripten.h include to have access to ```EMSCRIPTEN_KEEPALIVE```. This will instruct the compiler that the add() function shouldn't be deleted. The weird extern "C" with ifdefs is for the case the code is ran as if it is C++ code. When you run C code as C++, the name of the functions on the bytecode might be mangled so we wouldn't be able to call them.

But the compiler defines __cplusplus as true whenever it is compiling as C++ code, so we can use "#ifdef __cplusplus" to only run some parts of the code when it is on that context. In this code, the ```extern "C"{``` and the closing curly bracket.  

When using extern "C", you instruct the compiler to use C linkage and not mangle the name of the function, so we would be able to call it normally. 

And sure enough when I compiled the code and clicked on the "click me!" button, the following was printed on my console:

```
20 + 30 = 40
```

Yay! We managed to call a C function in a webpage. Life is good!

We are basically done, just one fun fact before ending this post. We don't actually have to do the KEEPALIVE bit, we can specify which functions we want to export on the compiler, like this:

```
emcc code.c -o output.js -s EXPORTED_FUNCTIONS="['_add']"     
```

But I prefer the EMSCRIPTEN_KEEPALIVE approach. Remember that the ```extern "C"``` bit is necessary regardless. 

If you want to discuss anything, have any corrections or questions about this post, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-13)
