---
layout: post
title: day 20 - chip-8 pt1 - designing the interpreter
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-20
---

Hello! This post will go over the process of building an CHIP-8 emulator (or interpreter, to be precise) in detail. I would recommend you have a crack at it before reading this because these next few posts will spoil much of the fun.

Regardless, if you think you work better with following a tutorial from start to finish, be my guest! Maybe try to reimplement the things I'm implementing in C in other language, like C++, C# or JS. That way you won't get caught in a loop of just typing whatever you are reading on your screen instead of absorbing the information.

Also, it would be nice for you to have read the [previous post](/blog/100-days-day-19) because it explains many of the things about emulator development that I won't explain this post again.

The first step is to figure out how we are going to deal with all the data we have to storage, like the memory and the stack.

One could think we should declare those as global variables, so we could use them in every function of our code and be done with it. But that's not great code practice, as global variables tend to be a bit messy. It's hard to debug a large code base when a change in any file could create a bug in a completely separate file. 

Also, if you want to create two different instances of the emulator, you would have to declare each variable twice, which wouldn't be ideal.

So, the next logical idea would be to declare it all on the main and pass it by reference to other functions, but this also has a big tradeoff. This would mean that every call to a function would look something like this:

```
c8_init(&memory, &stack, &sp, &I, ... &kb &draw_flag);
```

And that's because I left out several variables because I was too lazy to write. So, if you don't want to deal with these monstrocities, there are two solutions to that problem. You could use OOP, by creating a class called CHIP-8 with all these variables, or you could use a data structure. As I'm not the biggest fan of OOP, I'll opt for a struct, but OOP is just as good of a solution if not better in some aspects. 

The struct/object should look something like this:

```
#define SCREEN_H 32
#define SCREEN_W 64
#define STACK_LEVELS 16

struct CHIP-8{

    uint8_t memory[4096];
    uint8_t gfx[SCREEN_H*SCREEN_W];
    uint8_t V[16];
    uint16_t stack[STACK_LEVELS];
    uint16_t sp;
    uint16_t pc;
    uint16_t I;
    uint8_t dt;
    uint8_t st;
    uint8_t kb[16];
    uint8_t draw_flag;
};
```

If you don't remember what some of those variables are, go back to the [previous post](/blog/100-days-day-19).

Now we should create a simple function to initialize that structure, so we don't have to deal with uninitialized variables. This will mostly consist of making everything equal to 0, except for a few variables but those cases I will explain what is going on. 

```
#include <string.h>

void c8_init(CHIP-8 *c8){

    memset(c8->memory, 0, sizeof(c8->memory) );
    memset(c8->gfx, 0, sizeof(c8->gfx) );
    memset(c8->V, 0, sizeof(c8->V) );
    memset(c8->stack, 0, sizeof(c8->stack) );
    memset(c8->kb, 0, sizeof(c8->kb) );
    
    memcpy(c8->memory, font, sizeof(font) );

    c8->sp = 0;
    c8->pc = 0x200;
    c8->I = 0;
    c8->dt = 0;
    c8->st = 0;
    c8->draw_flag = 0;
}
```

If you're not familiar with memset and memcpy or you use a language where those functions aren't a thing, don't worry, they are simple to implement, I'm just too lazy.

memset() recieves as arguments an array, a value and a number of bytes. Then, memset() will make every byte from the first one to the byte you chose equal to the value you specified. The function sizeof() will return a number of bytes equal to the size of the array, so the memset will make the whole array equal to 0.

So to implement this by yourself, just make a for loop that sets every value equal to 0. 

memcpy() is a bit different but just as easy. It recieves a destination array, a source, and a number of bytes, and it just copies the specified number of bytes from the source to the destination array.

To implement this, just make a loop where ```memory[i] = font[i]```

By the way, I didn't even talk about this font array yet. To write numbers and letters to the screen, the CHIP-8 language calls for a fontset that is already declared somewhere in the machine. The fontset I'm using I got from [multigesture.net](https://multigesture.net/articles/how-to-write-an-emulator-chip-8-interpreter/) and it is looks like this:

```
uint8_t font[80] =
{ 
  0xF0, 0x90, 0x90, 0x90, 0xF0, // 0
  0x20, 0x60, 0x20, 0x20, 0x70, // 1
  0xF0, 0x10, 0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, // 2
  0xF0, 0x10, 0xF0, 0x10, 0xF0, // 3
  0x90, 0x90, 0xF0, 0x10, 0x10, // 4
  0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, 0x10, 0xF0, // 5
  0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, 0x90, 0xF0, // 6
  0xF0, 0x10, 0x20, 0x40, 0x40, // 7
  0xF0, 0x90, 0xF0, 0x90, 0xF0, // 8
  0xF0, 0x90, 0xF0, 0x10, 0xF0, // 9
  0xF0, 0x90, 0xF0, 0x90, 0x90, // A
  0xE0, 0x90, 0xE0, 0x90, 0xE0, // B
  0xF0, 0x80, 0x80, 0x80, 0xF0, // C
  0xE0, 0x90, 0x90, 0x90, 0xE0, // D
  0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, // E
  0xF0, 0x80, 0xF0, 0x80, 0x80  // F
};
```

Now that we dealt with that, the only weird thing that is left to talk about is the fact that pc starts at 0x200 (512) instead of 0. 

On actual devices that run CHIP-8, the first 512 bytes are reserved to the operational system/CHIP-8 interpreter. As our substitute for that is the C code, those first 512 bytes are not useful and we only care about the next 512, which will be the where the game is stored.

And that's also why we store the font inside the first few bytes of the memory array. As the game only starts from 0x200, we can put whatever we want on the beginning!

Next post we will finally start doing the fun stuff, which is writing the interpreter. 

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-21)
