---
layout: post
title: day 3 - network pt1 - ip addresses! 
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-3
---

Today was a no-code day. Network programming is hard! I don't know whether this is allowed in the rules of the challenge, but I make my own rules **muahahaha**. Also, I think having a robust theory foundation will serve me as well. If it doesn't, well, at least I had some fun learning about networks!

I mostly read the [Beej's Guide to Network Programming](https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/). This is an amazing book so far! It gave me only a little bit of a headache, and the witty writing more than made up for it. 

I decided to tackle ip adresses in this blog post! I am almost sure I'm going to mess up somewhere, but I'm going to try my best. If you want to read something more complete, better written, and more accurate, please refer to the Beej's guide. 

Let's start by talking about IPv4. You might've stumbled upon an IP address that looks like this:

```
192.0.2.30
```

This is an address from The Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4)! It is composed of four bytes (32 bits), represented in base-10 by the four numbers (called octets) that compose the address. Consequently, there are 2^(8\*4) => 2^32 possibilities for IPv4 addresses, which amount to a little over four billion. Now let's learn how to read an IP address.

Most of the times, we can broke down the IPv4 adresses in two portions, the first portion is called the network, and the second portion is called the host. We can figure out the network section if we know the netmask, which is a number which you can bitwise AND with the IPv4 address and it will give you the network number. For example, with the IP I mentioned beforehand, there is no way of knowing which part is the network and which part is the host. But if I knew the bitmask, let's say it is 255.0.0.0, I could separate the IP in network and host. In that case, the network would be 192.0.0.0 and the host would be 542. (2\*256 + 30).

But this approach of notating the netmask comes with problems. On the 255.0.0.0 example, it is easy to see the number of bits that represent the network, it is the first 8. But let's say the net mask is 255.255.255.240. How many bits represent the network portion? If you didn't bother figuring that out, you are absolutely correct, it is boring! So instead of representing the netmask like that, we can use a handy tool called CIDR notation. Instead of using this big weird string to notate the netmask, we simply append at the end of an IP address the number of bits that represent the network portion.

In the case of the 255.255.255.240 netmask, we would represent it as a /28, as in that case the number of network bits that the netmask represent is 28. So we would notate the 192.0.2.30 IPv4 address like 192.0.2.30/28. 

Keep in mind that although there are a lot of possibilities for network + host combinations for a given IPv4 address depending on the netmask, IPv4 addresses are unique. So no, one IPv4 cannot represent multiple combinations of network + host, there's always a correct netmask.

IPv4 addresses are fun and all, but there is one simple problem with them: there are too few IPv4 adresses!

You might be asking yourself, "but Arthur, didn't you just say there are over 4 billion addresses." And that's not wrong. However, we like computers. Nowadays cellphones can be computers, so can fridges, cars, watches, exercise bikes, and much more. And if there is something connected to the internet or any network, it needs an unique IP address. For this reason, we are almost out of IPv4 adresses! But there is no need to panic, we have an alternative, called The Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)! 

And this time they went all out. Instead of making it double the number of IPv4 addresses, or maybe four times, they decided to make it 128 bits, which is the equivalent to doubling the number of IPv4s 96 times! This means the number of IPv6 addresses is approximately big and a half. With that many IPs, we won't have to worry about connecting every water bottle to the internet. Ok, maybe we might have to worry a little, but not for the running-out-of-ips ordeal! 

The best feature, though, is that the convention is to type IPv6 addresses in hexadecimal numbers separated by colons, so we can feel like real hackers. Let's check out an IPv6:

```
2001:0DB8:e198:2b00:d2c1:9da2:141d:8592/32
```

Differently from an IPv4 address, IPv6 addresses are composed by 8 hextets, which are blocks of 16 bits or 2 bytes, separated by colons. The /32 at the end of the IP is the netmask, just like it is used on IPv4. 

IPv6 have some special features that are worth mentioning. For example, we can collapse hextets composed of zeroes, so the ip ```2001:0DB8:e198:2b00:0000:0000:0000:8592``` is equal to ```2001:0DB8:e198::8592```, We can collapse zeroes at the ending (```2001:0DB8::```, which is the network number for IPv6 addresses used in examples) and at the beginning as well (```::1```). Speaking of ::1, it is special because it is the IPv6 loopback address, which always refers to the machine that is running the request. It is the IPv6 equivalent to the well known IPv4 loopback address 127.0.0.1, which is the localhost address. 

There are plenty of other cool things to talk about on IPs, like port numbers, but this is all for today. Hopefully you learned a thing or two about IPs amisdt my ramblings. If you found a mistake or have any questions, you can contact me at arthurmpapp@gmail.com.

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-4)

