---
layout: post
title: day 2 - headers fun 
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-2
---

Today I don't have as much to talk about as I had yesterday. I believe the length of all the blog posts will be wildly different and I think that's ok. I feel a bit self-conscious about it, but I guess learning a lot everyday is unrealistic. I wouldn't hold anyone else to that standard, so it is only fair that I don't hold myself to it. 

I didn't do much coding today, I mostly read the [Beej's Guide to C Programming](https://beej.us/guide/bgc/). As I learned C in a non-structured way, I like to read about things I already know about because I always end up learning something new. The problem is, this approach of perfecting what I already know instead of exposing myself to knew things is *terribly* inefficient. But I much rather have fun learning than being at peak efficiency, frankly. 

One fun thing I learned reading this book is that these two declarations:

```
void foo(void);

void foo();
```

are actually different!

In C, ```void foo()``` means that the function can take any arguments and it won't check the types. ```void foo(void)``` is the right way to declare a function with no parameters.

This was fun and all but the name of the challenge is 100 days of **code**, which means I should probably do a bit of coding. I decided to go back to the replace line project and structure it better by using header files.

This is a great opportunity to talk about includes. Essentialy, includes are like copying and pasting code. Let's say I create a header file called **header.h** with the following code:

```
#include <stdio.h>
int ARTHUR = 19;
```

And I create a file called **main.c** with the following code:

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include "header.h"

int main(void){
    printf(ARTHUR);
}
```
And I compiled **main.c** and ran it, it would print 19, even though ARTHUR is not defined in **main.c**. This is because all the code in **header.h** is pasted on **main.c**

This is the essence of header files, but there is still one thing worth discussing. Let's say I make the following change to main.c:

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include "header.h"
#include "header.h"

int main(void){
    printf(ARTHUR);
}
```
What do you think it is going to happen? Tip, it doesn't compile. 

To visualize what is happening, let me substitute the includes by the code in **header.h**. 

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdio.h>
int ARTHUR = 19;
#include <stdio.h>
int ARTHUR = 19;

int main(void){
    printf(ARTHUR);
}
```
The integer ARTHUR is declared two times! This is not allowed in C, therefore, a compilation error happens. 

But there are plenty of things that are declared in **stdio.h**, and we included it three times. A natural question would be: why doesn't this lead to a compilation error?

The answer to that is header guards. They are conditions we use to check if the library we are trying to include is already included so we avoid declaring things twice. 

Let's see it in practice in **header.h**:

```
#ifndef HEADER_H
#define HEADER_H

#include <stdio.h>
int ARTHUR = 19

#endif
```
Let's go over it line by line. 

```#ifndef HEADER_H``` means "If HEADER_H is not defined". This is like a regular if clause, which ends on the ```#endif``` line, and the code between those two lines will only be executed if the condition is met. 

```#define HEADER_H``` This line will define HEADER_H. As the code inside **header_h** will only be executed if HEADER_H is not defined, and whenever we execute **header.h** for the first time we define it, this means it is impossible to run the original code more than once, therefore ARTHUR will not be declared twice. 

Keep in mind that we could've named the define any way we want. The convention is using "FILENAME_H" but if you substituted every instance of "HEADER_H" by "ARTHURMENDES" it would still work as intended. The only concern you need to have is that the define in all header files must have a unique name, to prevent two different files having header guards that clash with each other. 

These lines happen in pretty much every header file to prevent that exact problem, including **stdio.h**. So don't forget to add those lines whenever you are coding a header file. 

The code for **replace_line.h** in my project ended up like this:

```c
#ifndef REPLACELINE_H
#define REPLACELINE_H

#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

void replace_line(int l, char *text, FILE *file1, FILE *file2){
 
    char buffer[1024];

    int currentline = 1;

    while(fgets(buffer, 1024, file1) != NULL){
        
        if(currentline == l){
            
            fputs(text, file2);
        } 
        else {
        
            fputs(buffer, file2);
        }

        currentline++;
    }
}

#endif
```

If you want to read the code discussed in this post, [click here](https://github.com/ArthurAMP/c-files-practice).

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-3)


