---
layout: post
title: day 18 - learning how to market myself
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-18
---

This is a a rant. If you don't want to read someone whining about things, this is your chance to leave:

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-19)

You've been warned.

I've been coding for a few years at this point. I know I could be a much better developer than I am right now, but I'm still proud of the things I've learned and did. I've participated in a few hackathons, coding bootcamps. I studied by myself C, Dart, JS, python, Octave. I made APIs with Flask and Express and front ends with pure html+js and react. 

I'm not a good developer by any means, but I'm pretty sure I could hold my own on a junior dev position. But before college, getting the first job isn't really about what I know. It is much more about what I can show off.

Most of my projects aren't public. Most of my studies were with books and not in MOOCs so I don't have many certificates. I don't have a pretty portfolio page.  

I don't have any ways of showing how competent I am besides interviews, and I'm most definetly not getting any interviews.

Maybe it's arrogance of my part and in actuality I'm just not qualified enough. But I can't help but think that I should stop focusing on learning and just focus on making myself the most employable I can. 

This thought is very sad to me. 

I really wouldn't like making useless threads on twitter to amass followers by being the most generic I can. I don't want to choose projects thinking of what would be the most visual instead of the best learning opportunity. 

I can't help but think I'm acting against my best interest. For example, I'm in the 18th day of the challenge. I could focus the rest of the 82 days to making simple python projects with pyqt and pygame, like the snake game, animated sorting algorithms, and maybe animated data structures. 

This would make me exponentially more likely to get a job without learning anything new in that time span. 

I won't do it, though. But I guess I needed to get these thoughts out of my head. I'll just focus on being the best programmer and educator I can be. Maybe sometime after college I get a job, and I stop having to care about marketing myself. 

Maybe I become a researcher, then I can devote my thoughts entirely to making new things instead of having a pretty twitter banner. 

That's all I had to talk about today. Tomorrow I'll go back to technical stuff, which is what I do best. 

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-19)
