---
layout: post
title: day 23 - chip-8 pt4 - (more) more opcodes
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-23
---

This series of post start on [this post](/blog/100-days-day-19).

Today we will be done with opcodes, I promise. 

- SNE Vx, Vy

Copy and paste 0x5xy0 and change it from equal to not equal. 

```
case 0x9000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]!=c8->V[opcode&0x00F0>>4] 
        ? c8->pc += 4 : (c8->pc += 2);
    break;
```

- LD I, addr

Pretty much the same of every other LD we did on this series. 

```
case 0xA000:
    c8->I = opcode&0x0FFF;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

I realize explanations are not that interesting so far. To be fair with myself, all of these opcodes aren't very interesting. It starts to get good at 0xCxkk I promise.

- JP V0, addr

Just like the 0x1xxx but we sum a register on it. Very interesting.

```
case 0xB000:
    c8->pc = c8->V[0] + opcode&0x0FFF;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```


- RND Vx, byte

Finally, something new! Not that hard, but still new. Grab your favorite random numberr generator function (I'll be using rand()), your percent signs, and make Vx equal to a random number from 0 to 255!

```
case 0xC000:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] = (rand()%256)&opcode&0x00FF;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

If you are in a higher level language, chances are the most standard RNG function will allow you to specify the range. As rand() doesn't, I made Vx equal to rand() module 256. Module is an mathematical operator that returns the reminder of the operation x/y. The fun thing is, the max value a reminder can have is the divisor of the division minus one! 

Let's thing about divisions by three for example.

```
0/3 = 0 (reminder = 0)
1/3 = 0 (reminder = 1)
2/3 = 0 (reminder = 2)
3/3 = 1 (reminder = 0)
4/3 = 1 (reminder = 1)
...
432425123450/3 = 144141707816 (reminder = 2)
```

And visually it's easy to see that this will be the case forever and for every divisor. So by grabbing the random number module 256, I'm essentially making sure that the number I generate will be between 0 and 255.

- DRW Vx, Vy, nibble

This one gave me a lot of headache. My implementation is kind of silly, but I think it's cute. 

```
case 0xD000:
    c8->draw_flag = 1;
            
    uint8_t x = c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8];
    uint8_t y = c8->V[opcode&0x00F0>>4];
            
    c8->V[0] = 0;
    for(int i = 0; i < opcode&0x000F; i++){
        for(int j = 0; j < 8; j++){
            if((c8->memory[c8->I+i]>>j)%2){
                        
                c8->V[15] |= c8->gfx[(x+i)+((y+j)*64)];
                c8->gfx[(x+i)+((y+j)*64)] ^= 1;
            }
        }
    }
    c8->pc+=2;
    break;
```

Let's go over our goal. Every sprite on the memory is stored in a way that each byte corresponds for 8 pixels. So we have to loop through each bit on a byte and see if it is 0 or 1. I didn't think of any good, visual way to loop through it, so I just did this:

```
for(int j = 7; j >= 0; j--){
    if((c8->memory[c8->I+i]>>j)%2){
        ...              
    }
}
```

Let's say I found the following byte in memory: 10010010.

To loop through it from the left to the right, I created a loop that started at 7 and decreased until 0 that shifted the position in memory j steps. So on the first interaction it would lead to the number 1, in the second it would lead to 10, the third would be 100... OK. I found a way to grab sections of a number, but the problem was that I would need only the rightmost bit of each section.

That's why I used module 2. The neat thing about binary numbers is that every number which the rightmost bit is 0 is divisible by 2. If it ends in 1, it cannot be divided by two. As %2 is checking if it is divisible or not by two, This if statement essentially checks if the rightmost bit after the shift is 1 or 0, which was precisely what we needed!

But the problems on the draw opcode doesn't end there. We had to check for colision.

```
c8->V[15] |= c8->gfx[(x+i)+((y+j)*64)];
```

This line of code is unnecessarily unreadable but I found it quite amusing. What we needed to do to check for collision is to check if the pixel we wanted to paint was 0 or 1. If it was 1, a collision happened. So we could do it like this:

```
if(c8->gfx[(x+i)+((y+j)*64)]){
    c8->V[15] = 1;
}
```

As we set V\[15\] as 0 beforehand, it would be certainly 0 if we didn't find any collision. By using or-equal, V\[15\] will be 0 until the rightmost element was 1, then it would become 1 and stay that way. This works because 0|0 = 0, 0|1 = 1 and 1|1 = 1.

NOTE: If you can't understand why we did that "\*64" bit in the loop, think of it this way. The screen is 64 pixels wide and 32 pixels tall, but we are using a 2d array as if it was flat. To convert it to 2d, we consider every pixel from 0 to 63 to be the first row, 64 to 127 to be the second, and so it goes. So we could represent it as (x, 64\*y), as every time we jump to the next row, the first pixel will be 0+row\*64

I hope this was enough explanation on this opcode, but it is tricky, so don't shy away from messaging me if you need any further explanation. My email is arthurmpapp@gmail.com

- SKP Vx and SKNP Vx

After such exciting opcode, I felt sad I had to go back to the usual skip opcodes. You know the drill, you just have to do pc+=4 if the key is pressed and pc+=2 if it isn't, or the opposite if SKNP. We created the kb integer to check that. 

But I decided to do something a little more fun. 

```
case 0xE000:
    c8->pc += 2 + 2*(c8->kb[c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]] == 
        ((opcode&0x000F) == 0xE) );
    break;
```

This monstrocity of an opcode deals with both SKP and SKNP in a single opcode. Don't do that, please, as it makes debugging opcodes hell and it doesn't even check if it actually is any of those opcodes instead of a mistyped opcode.

But if you want to learn how this opcode wrotes, it first does pc+=2 regardless, but the right side is more interesting. ```c8->kb[c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]]``` Is the variable that checks if the key was pressed. We compare this variable with ```(opcode&0x000F) == 0xE)```, which is 0 if the opcode is SKNP and 1 if the opcode is SKP. Now let's go over the possibilities.

If the left side is 0 and it is SKP (right side 1), the == operator returns 0. If the left side is 1 and it is SKP, the operator returns 1. And if it is SKNP, the opposite happens. As we multiply it by two and sum it to pc, it works exactly as intended. Please don't do this. 

Now we'll finish with the opcodes starting with F.

- LD Vx, DT

Standard boring LD stuff. 

```
case 0x0007:
    c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] == c8->dt;
    c8->pc += 2; 
    break;
```

- LD Vx, K

Not so boring LD stuff. This one we have to check with a loop if any key is pressed and only go to the next instruction when a key is pressed. For that, we'll have to create a variable called pressed and update it when we check a keypress.

```
case 0x000A:
    uint8_t pressed = 0;
    for(int i = 0; i < 16; i++){
                        
        c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] = i*c8->kb[i];
        pressed |= c8->kb[i];
    }

    c8->pc += 2*(pressed);
    break;
```

I did some "equal-or" shenanigans again, but don't worry. It just means that pressed will be 0 until kb[i] is 1, in that case pressed will be 1.

- LD DT, Vx, LD ST, Vx, ADD I, Vx

I cannot think of a single interesting, new thing to say about these opcodes, so I'm just going to paste my code. 

```
case 0x0015:
    c8->dt = c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8];
    c8->pc += 2; 
    break;
case 0x0018:
    c8->st = c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8];
    c8->pc += 2; 
    break;
case 0x001E:
    c8->I += c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8];
    c8->pc += 2; 
    break;
```

- LD F, Vx

This one is a little cooler. Remember the fontset we talked about at part 1? We'll use it here. 

```
case 0x0029:
    c8->I = c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8] * 5;
    c8->pc += 2;
    break;
```

The only tricky part of that opcode is that you have to remember that the font on the fontset is a 5x4 matrix. So each character's first pixel is separated by 5 pixels. So when we have to access for example, the third character, we have to start by accessing the position 5*3 instead of position 3. 

- LD B, Vx

You know when people say you need math to code? It's because of moments like this. 

As c truncates the number in a division, to get the number in the hundreds, we just have to divide it by 100. Like 123/100 is 1, 213/100 is 2 and 34/100 is 0. This only works because the numbers range from 0 to 255, as numbers greater than 999 would return more than one number. Like 1234/100 = 12, 33333/100 = 333...

But the decimal case is a tad bit harder. We can't just divide by 10, because we deal with the same problem. 256/10 is 25, 110/10 is 11...

But we can be save by module once again! When we divide a number by ten, the reminder is always the ones digit. 1234/100 is 12 but the reminder is 4. 256/10 is 25 but the reminder is 6, and so it goes. So instead of just dividing the number by ten, we divide it by ten and get the reminder. 

For example: (256/10)%10 is 5, (33333/10)%10 is 3 and (110/10)%10 is 1.

Now all that is left is to get the ones number, but we already discussed this. Just get the reminder of the division by 10.

My code ended up looking like this:

```
case 0x0033:
    c8->memory[c8->I] = c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]/100;
    c8->memory[c8->I+1] = (c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8]/10)%10;
    c8->memory[c8->I+2] = (c8->V[opcode&0x0F00>>8])%10;
    c8->pc+=2;
    break;
```

Great, now there are only two opcodes left. Can't wait to see them!

- LD [I], Vx, LD Vx, [I]

```
case 0x0055:
    for(int i = 0; i < 16; i++){
        c8->memory[c8->I+i] = c8->V[i];
    }
    c8->pc+=2;
    break;
case 0x0065:
    for(int i = 0; i < 16; i++){
    c8->V[i] = c8->memory[c8->I+i];
    }
    c8->pc+=2;
    break;
```

Sigh. The only difference from the LD stuff we used to do beforehand is that this time we loop through the registers. 

And that's it for the opcodes starting with... any character. If you have any questions, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com.

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-24)
