---
layout: post
title: day 25 - chip-8 pt6 - writing the display
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-25
---

This series of post start on [this post](/blog/100-days-day-19).

This blog post will be quite simple, as I will not be explaining language specific things and instead I will only focus on the logic behind printing the display, which is a very simple effort.

Now it is finally time to make the game loop. Our game loop should consist of the following sections, represented by "pseudocode" functions:

```
while(!quit){

    c8_next_op(&c8);
    if(c8.draw_flag) render_screen();
    handle_events();
}
```

Today we'll code the render_screen bit. The condition ended up looking like this:

```
if(c8.draw_flag == 1){

    c8.draw_flag = 0;
    c8_render(&c8, renderer);
    SDL_RenderPresent(renderer);
}
```

Remember to set the draw_flag = 0 when calling the render function. Now let's take a look at c8_render().

The first thing I do in that function is to set the whole screen to a single color, which will represent the 0 in the gfx array. You can choose any color to represent that, but I went with black, which is the color that usually represents the 0.

```
void c8_render(struct CHIP8 *c8, SDL_Renderer *renderer){
    SDL_SetRenderDrawColor(renderer, 0, 0, 0, 255);
    SDL_RenderClear(renderer);
    ...
}
```

The SDL_SetRenderDrawColor() recieves a rgba code after the renderer, so 0, 0, 0, 255 is black with alpha value 255.

Now we can change the color to white to draw the pixels on the screen. 

```
SDL_SetRenderDrawColor(renderer, COLOR_B.r, COLOR_B.g, COLOR_B.b, COLOR_B.a);
```

To finish this function, we have to loop through the gfx array to draw the pixels. We'll do that with a simple for loop.

```
for(int i = 0; i < (SCREEN_H*SCREEN_W); i++){

    if(c8->gfx[i] == 1){ // if the pixel is 1, we draw it
        int x = (i%64)*8; // x coord
        int y = (i/64)*8; // y coord
        
        SDL_Rect rect = {x, y, 8, 8}; // 8, 8 = size of the "pixel"
        SDL_RenderFillRect(renderer, &rect);
    }
}
```

Remember that instead of being a 2d array, gfx is an 1d array which represents a flattened 2d array. To unflatten it, we can use division. Every 64 bytes represents a line in the array, so the 65th byte would represent the first byte in the second line. So, by dividing it by 64, we can figure out the line in which the pixel is located.

To get which pixel from a specific line we are trying to draw, we can use the remainder of the division by 64. 

We multiply these values by 8 because we are drawing each pixel as actually 8x8 rectangles, because a 64x32 is very small. This upscale makes it easier to see it on modern screens.

So while the first pixel is positioned on 0, 0, the second isn't positioned on 1, 0, as they would overlap because their size isn't 1, 1. The second pixel instead is found at 8, 0.

And that's all on drawing the screen for now. Now you can actually run games on CHIP-8 and you'll see the visual feedback! But we are not done yet, we need to handle input first.

If you have any questions, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com.

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-25)
