---
layout: post
title: day 5 - network pt3 - tcp and udp
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-5
---

Today was another day that I studied more than I coded, so this blog post won't be about code, but instead about the two most common protocols of the transport layer on the internet: TCP and UDP.

Most materials on the internet are awfully jargony to the point that it took me a while to grasp what all these words actually mean, but in reality it is not that hard to understand. I'll try my best to make it simple here.

Communication between a client and a server is not performed by sending whole files at once, instead the data is divided in small packets to make the communication more efficient. For that reason, it was needed protocols to ensure different servers would communicate with clients in a standardized way instead of every server having a different protocol.

For that need, the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) was invented, with all sorts of clever techniques to solve problems related to data transmission over the internet. 

Some of these problems are: we cannot guarantee that a packet that was sent first will arrive first, we cannot be sure that our intended reciever is listening, and we cannot guarantee a packet sent will even arrive at all. 

For those reasons, TCP is connection-based, which means that it will only send data after a connection between the two computers is estabilished, and each TCP packet comes packed with extra data. Some of data include: a sequence number to ensure the data will be on the right order, an acknowledge number to ensure the data has been recieved and a checksum field to ensure the header hasn't been damaged.

With all these features, TCP is pretty reliable. It can detect most errors easily and it is ordered. It is used whenever you need to make sure the data has been properly transmitted, like in emails, web pages, and messaging apps. 

The problem is that with all this extra data, it is bound to be slow, and some apps need faster data transmition and don't necessarily mind some data loss. That's where User Datagram Protocol (UDP) comes into play. 

An UDP packet is conectionless, has no sequence number, and no acknowledge number. Because it doesn't care if the packets are unordered or if they aren't recieved at all. For that reason, data transmition with UDP is much faster than data transmition with TCP. It is used commonly in apps that require real-time streaming of information. 

When you are in a call with someone, you probably don't mind if a packet or two is dropped, as it wouldn't stop you from understanding the other person. But if it had a sizeable and consistent delay between you speaking and them hearing, it would be a big problem. That's why an app like discord uses TCP for text chat, but UDP for voice. The same is seen on games, where having a small input lag matters more than the order the packets arrive, and many other apps.

I hope this is a decent primer for someone who never heard learned about UDP and TCP, but this is not nearly enough. Especially as I glossed over important things like how the connection is actually made and how ACK packets work. But I don't think anyone would benefit from that much information on the first read. 

If you have any questions, feel free to email me at arthurmpapp@gmail.com

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-6))