---
layout: post
title: day 1 - why scanf, why???
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-1
---

Finally, I got to start my 100 days of code challenge in C!! I thought I had some previous knowledge, but it took me about 10 minutes to notice I don't know anything.

To start the challenge, I decided to do a simple project to recap my C skills. I opted to make a program to replace a line in a file with a string. I thought it was going to be fairly straightforward, 10-minute project. It wasn't. 

When I coded in C/C++ for competitive programming, I didn't mind much whether my code was safe, or what would happen if the user put the wrong input by accident. 

I started by getting a string from the user, with the code I was already familiar.

```
char name[20];
scanf("%s", &name);
fflush(stdin);
```

But I decided to google it. My dreams were crushed by [this document](https://sekrit.de/webdocs/c/beginners-guide-away-from-scanf.html). Apparently, there are three things wrong with my code. 

Firstly, scanf won't truncate the input to the string's size, so if I provide a really long input, there will be problems. This can be solved with the following fix:

```
scanf("%19s", &name);
```

This makes sure that scanf will only read 19 characters. Remember that you cannot put 20 instead of 19 because C strings end with a "/0", the null character. So you need to leave some space for it. 

Great, so we solved the buffer overflow and everything is good, right? Wrong. 

Secondly, scanf doesn't deal well with spaces. It is not a function to parse strings, it is a function to parse words. So when you feed it with a string with spaces, it ignores everything after the space character and leaves it in the stdin buffer. This is REALLY bad.

But I did put a line to make sure to flush the buffer after the read. So I solved this problem and everything is good, right? Wrong. 

As I learned in the aforementioned document, flushing the input stream is undefined behavior. In some systems, it might work, but in others it will simply not flush the stdin. 

For this reason, using scanf is not the right approach to this. Instead, we should do this:

```
printf("enter your first name: \n");
if(fgets(name, 20, stdin) == NULL){
    printf("error: failed reading string");
    return 1;
}
```
Instead of using scanf, we use the function fgets, which doesn't lead to any of the problems I mentioned beforehand. It reads everything, including endlines and spaces and it truncates the input to the size we specify. I put it inside the if just to check if the operation works, but the important part is the ```fgets(name, 20, stdin)```.

Other thing I learned is that scanf is not only bad at reading strings, it is also bad at reading integers. If your user, for example, instead of providing a number they provided something like "2312312himynameisarthur". Scanf would stop reading when the integer was over and leave the text on the stdin stream.

To avoid this problem, we have to read a string and then convert it into a integer. I did it this way:

```
do
     {
        printf("enter a positive line number: \n");
                                                    
        if(fgets(line, 1024, stdin) == NULL){

            printf("error: failed reading number");
            return 1;
        }

        linenumber = atoi(line);
    } while(linenumber < 1); 
```

This do-while loop reads a line and then convert into a integer using the stdlib atoi function. When this function cannot parse a string into a integer, it returns 0, so the loop will continue and we'll be able to read another line number.

Also, a quick tip to finish the blog post. If you want to loop throughout a file, do not use feof() to check if you should end the loop. If you want to know why, check out this link on [cprogramming](https://faq.cprogramming.com/cgi-bin/smartfaq.cgi?answer=1046476070&id=1043284351).


If you just want to know how I implemented the loop, I used the return value of the fgets function to check when there is no more text to be read. 

```
while(fgets(buffer, 1024, file) != NULL){
        
    if(currentline == linenumber){
            
        fputs(name, tempfile);
    } 
    else {
        
        fputs(buffer, tempfile);
    }

    currentline++;
}
```

This day made me excited to continue on this challenge. I learned quite a bit in a short span of time and this makes me wonder how much better I will be in 100 days from now. 

If you want to read the code discussed in this post, [click here](https://github.com/ArthurAMP/c-files-practice).

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-2)

















