---
layout: post
title: day 19 - what is an emulator? 
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-19
---

Making an emulator may seem like a hard task for a beginner. I mean, where do we even start? How to imitate a whole computer with just code?

Although making emulators of newer systems like a PS4 or a Switch is a monumental effort and the teams behind those softwares are very talented people, emulating a older system is not more than a week's worth of effort. It just takes a little guiding to building the intuition to develop it. 

This post won't teach you how to build an emulator directly, but hopefully this will give you the tools to make your own research about it. 

### Where do we even start?

First things first, we should look at the anatomy of the system. I will focus on CHIP-8 because it is probably the easiest project to start with. Technically, we don't build CHIP-8 emulators, as there is no such thing as a "CHIP-8 CPU." It is an interpreted programming language. 

Still, learning to make a CHIP-8 interpreter can teach us a lot about emulating dev.

We can start by looking at memory. Googling CHIP-8, we can see that it is implemented on a plentitude of systems. 

Checking Cosmac VIP, which seems to be where a CHIP-8 emulator was first implemented, we can see it runs on 4096 bytes (or 4kb) memory. Let's run with that.

So, how can we emulate a memory of 4kb? At first glance, it is normal to be unsure. But the answer to that question is surprisingly simple. 

```
uint8_t memory[4096];
```

uint8_t is a type that represents an unsigned integer of 8 bits, in other words, a byte. It ends up being equivalent to an unsigned char, as it is also an 8 bits integer.

Ok, we just basically emulated the RAM of a Cosmac VIP! Now let's move to the graphics. 

CHIP-8 is designed for a 64x32 pixels display. It is a black and white display so we don't have to worry about color. 

As the only states of the pixels are 0 or 1, you could use an array of booleans to store the graphics. As we don't have that in C, we'll just do a one byte per pixel screen, wasting precious 7 bits for each pixel.

```
uint8_t graphics[64*32];
```

You might wonder, why not make it a 64 by 32 matrix instead. Techincally you can, but it would make the job a little harder than it needs to be, as the operations of the cpu are designed to work with a 64*32-sized array.

We could render this graphics array using any graphic library we want easily, we just have to create very large pixels because a 64x32 screen is not so great. It is as easy as looping through this array and creating 8x8 squares with the color black if it is a 1 and the color white if it is a 0.

Now we need registers. CPU registers are quick-access memory. (It takes only one clock cycle to access it.) We cannot store all of the data in those registers because there are too few of them, so we only store on those registers things we'll need to access a lot of times and really fast, like the program counter and the stack pointer.


Cosmac VIP's CPU, the RCA 1802, has 16, 16-bit registers. But not all of them are used to store data. Some are used for things like the program counter, as I mentioned beforehand. We need 16 data registers, each one of them containing 8 bits of information.

```
uint8_t V[16];
```

For the other CHIP-8 registers (I'm reading this on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8) by the way):

```
uint16_t pc; // 16-bit register to store 
// in which instruction we are in the code
uint16_t I; // A 16-bit register to point
// to a memory address
```

Ok, now we need a stack. A stack will be hard to explain in a few sentences, but this is my best shot:

When we call a subroutine (function), we have to remember where we were on the code beforehand so we can safely come back after the subroutine has ended. Whenever we call a subroutine, we have to push the current program counter to the stack. 

The problem is, sometimes we have to call subroutines inside subroutines. When that is the case, it is a bit harder to keep track of where we were before calling any subroutines. That's why the stack isn't a single variable, it is an array which supports several program counters. We also need a pointer that points to the place in the place in the stack that stores the instruction we have to come back to when we end the subroutine.

Wikipedia tells us RCA 1802 used 12 levels of nesting, but CHIP-8 allows for 16 levels. 

```
uint16_t stack[16];
uint16_t sp;
```

We also need a delay and sound timers to handle the delays and the sounds. (wow, very didatic.) Both of those have a count down rate of 60 hertz.

```
uint16_t delay_timer; // this will deal with timing
uint16_t sound_timer; // when this reaches 0 it makes
// fun beep noise
```

Being completely honest, I have no clue how big should these timers be. I figured it shouldn't need to be any bigger than 16 bits so I put them as 16 bits. If the game for some reason wants to wait for more than 1100 seconds to make a sound, unfortunately it will overflow. Too bad!

Now we need a keypad array, which will store which keys are we pressing at the moment. There is 16 keys in the keyboard used to control a CHIP-8 game, so we need an array of 16 variables, which could be boolean, but as I'm in C, I'll use uint8_t.

```
uint8_t kb[16];
```

Now it's the time that you will need to do the heavy lifting, as we actually need to write the interpreter! We'll need a loop, a bit like this:

```
while (1){
    c8_Cycle();
}
```

And inside this function, we need to deal with actually interpreting the game. The interpreting is done by processing operation codes (opcodes) and making the necessary adjustments to the memory. The best place in my opinion to find these opcodes in an easy to read way is on this [technical reference](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM#3.1).

By the way, please check [Dr. Devernay's](http://devernay.free.fr/) other stuff. Amazing works and amazing writing.

Ok, so I will not teach in depth how to write each opcode on this blog post. The next few blog posts will be an walkthrough to my process of writing the interpreter. This post is just aiming to give you a basic understanding. 

If you want to try it yourself instead of following my walkthrough, here's a hint. This is more or less the way I dealt with the RET opcode:

```
int c8_cycle(){
    uint8_t opcode = c8->memory[c8->pc]; 
    switch (opcode&0xF000){
        case 0x0000:
            switch(opcode&0x000F){
                case 0x000E:
                    c8->pc = c8->stack[c8->sp];
                    c8->sp--;
                    break;
            }
            break;
    }
}
```

Hopefully, this gave you a little bit of an idea of how to implement other opcodes. 

That's all I have for today. I hope this blog post could help you understand a little deeper how would anyone go about developing their own emulator/interpreter. Tomorrow I will finally start the complete walkthrough! 

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-20)
