---
layout: post
title: day 11 - webassembly - who needs emscripten?
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-11
---

Today I decided to learn how to compile my C code to .wasm. I know people usually use emscripten for this task, and I intend on using emscripten, but I like trying to understand a little about how it works behind the scene, so for this first attempt I'm going to do it through clang. 

I never really used clang, but WebAssembly is written for llvm so it's not like I have a choice.

Before looking for tutorials, I tend to try doing it on my own, failing miserably and catastrophically, and then looking for tutorials. This blog post will be mostly about the failing process, so you can get the benefit from the exploration without losing sanity.

I wrote the following code and called it a.c:

```
#include <stdio.h> 

int main(){
    printf("Hello World!");
}
```

Pretty simple, right? It must be a piece of cake. 

Then I typed the following command to the terminal:

```
clang --target=wasm32 -o a.wasm a.c
```

As I pressed enter, the failing commenced. 

```
a.c:1:10: fatal error: 'stdio.h' file not found
#include <stdio.h>
```

"What? I'm pretty sure I have stdio.h on my path." I thought. But, just in case, I decided to include the path to stdio.h on the compilation command.

```
clang --target=wasm32 -i/usr/include -o a.wasm a.c

a.c:1:10: fatal error: 'stdio.h' file not found
#include <stdio.h>
```

Ok, this did nothing, and by using the -v (verbose) flag I found this message:

```
ignoring duplicate directory "/usr/include"
```

So it wasn't that it didn't find the directory, the problem is something else. 

At that point I gave up and just removed the stdio include and substituted a.c for the following code:

```
int add(int x, int y){
    return x+y;
}
```

Then I tried the same command I used the first time, and it didn't work at all! :) Different error though, so progress!

```
clang-13: error: unable to execute command: Executable "wasm-ld" doesn't exist!
clang-13: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
```

This one was pretty easy to deal with. I installed wasm-ld by downloading lld using ```sudo pacman -S lld```. If you want to do the same on a debian-based distro, do ```sudo apt-get install lld```. I didn't test it though, but it probably will go well. As you can imagine, this didn't work either, but a different error ocourred. 

```
wasm-ld: error: unknown file type: /lib/crt1.o
wasm-ld: error: cannot open /usr/lib/clang/13.0.1/lib/libclang_rt.builtins-wasm32.a: No such file or directory
clang-13: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
```

This error caused me a lot of pain, I spent at least half an hour trying to figure out why this error came up. At some point I decided to try to "uninclude" the standard c lib because it was causing problems before. I googled how to do that in clang, and it spit out the flag ```-nostdlib```. So I tried the following command:

```
clang --target=wasm32 -nostdlib --no-entry -o a.wasm a.c

wasm-ld: error: entry symbol not defined (pass --no-entry to suppress): _start
clang-13: error: linker command failed with exit code 1 (use -v to see invocation)
```

Makes sense. My code doesn't have a main() so I understand why it would complain to me. Thankfully it gave me the command to fix the error. So I tried it. 

```
clang --target=wasm32 -nostdlib --no-entry -o a.wasm a.c 

clang-13: error: unsupported option '--no-entry'
```

Wow! The flag that it suggested to me doesn't exist. Wowzers! I love computers.

At that point I started to think I would not make it to the end without just googling a tutorial, and I would be correct, but it wasn't because of that problem. This problem was pretty simple to fix, actually. I learned that in clang, when you need to pass an option to the linker, you should precede it with the flag -Wl and a comma, like this: 

```
clang --target=wasm32 -nostdlib --no-entry -o a.wasm a.c
```

And it actually compiled! I felt like the smartest person on earth as I finally managed to brute force my way into getting a .wasm bytecode file with no thought whatsoever. Spoiler alert: it didn't work. 

To test the .wasm file, made the following page in html:

```
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html>
    <body>
        <script src="file.js"></script>
        <button onclick="test()">click me!</button>
    </body>
<html>
```

And the following JS script:

```
async function test() {
    const importObject = {
        imports: {
            imported_func: arg => {
                console.log(arg);
            }
        }
    };
    const {instance} = await WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming(
      fetch("./a.wasm"),
        importObject
    );

    console.log(instance.exports.add(3, 3));
}
```

If you don't understand anything about this code, me neither, I just started copying some codes I saw on the internet left and right until I was left with this. I just wanted something to test my code, actually learning how to use it is a subject for tomorrow. 

I ran it in a web server using this command on my terminal: ```python3 -m http.server```.

I expected to see the number 6 printed on the terminal as I pressed on the button I've created. Obviously, that was NOT the case. 

```
Uncaught (in promise) TypeError: instance.exports.add is not a function
    at test (file.js:14:34)
```

I tried changing the JS code in several ways, but nothing quite seemed to do the trick. The problem was in the way I compiled my code. I didn't have a way to debug it as according to the compiler, everything went fine.

So I give up and clicked on a blog post that explained exactly how to compile c code into .wasm without emscripten, and why it is compiled that way.

The blog is absolutely beautiful, sharply written and really informative. Please if you have any interest on anything I wrote here, [click here](https://surma.dev/things/raw-wasm/) to check the blog post I'm refering to and just follow [Surma](https://surma.dev/) in general. He is awesome and over-the-top smart.

Anyways, if you REALLY don't want to click that post and still wants to know why the command I used did not work. It lacked a linker flag to export the functions I wrote on the c code. So close yet soooooo far :(

The correct command would be something like this:

```
clang --target=wasm32 -nostdlib -Wl,--no-entry -Wl,--export-all -o a.wasm a.c 
```

Keep in mind that there is various optimizations to make in this compilation command, but you're going to have to check out Surma's blog to figure them out ;)

Also, about the -nostdlib bit, it kinda doesn't makes sense to use the standard library in that context because of the way they work. When you include the stdio.h file and use, for example, the function printf(), it requests services from the kernel to do all the work. This is what we call "system calls" or "syscalls." As our .wasm bytecode runs on the JavaScript engine of a browser, it doesn't have the services that the syscalls from the standard libraries require, so we can't use them. Thankfully, resources like emscripten and wasicc does all of that and more to us, so I will promptly ignore that I ever wanted to use WebAssembly without emscripten's help. 

So, yeah, now we know how to compile C code into .wasm and use it on the web. Finally, we can stop coding on JS forever! (Not really, and WebAssembly doesn't plan on substituing JavaScript.) Tomorrow I intend to learn how to do things the easier way (and with the stdlibs) using emscripten. 

If you want to discuss anything, have any corrections or questions about this post, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-12)
