---
layout: post
title: day 13 - cmake pt1 - compiling C with cmake
category: 100-days-of-code
slug: 100-days-day-13
---

This is probably not the most useful blog post I've written, I'm mostly writing it to help fixate the steps in my memory. If you prefer more qualified people or video tutorials, I recommend checking out [vector-of-bool](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLK6MXr8gasrGmIiSuVQXpfFuE1uPT615s) video series. Regardless, let's talk about compiling with cmake.

This tutorial assumes you have cmake installed and you're in an unix environment. If you don't have it installed, install cmake with ```sudo pacman -S cmake```, ```sudo apt-get install cmake```, or with your favorite package manager.

Let's start by creating a folder.

```
mkdir cmake-test
cd cmake-test
```

In that folder, create a simple c code which you want to compile. If you want to follow this tutorial rigorously, write the following code into a file called test.c:

```
#include <stdio.h>

int add(int x, int y){
    return x+y;
}

int main(int argc, char *argv[]){

    int n, m;
    printf("hello, cmake!\n");
    
    scanf("%d", &n);
    scanf("%d", &m);

    printf("%d + %d = %d", n, m, add(n, m));
    return 0;
}
```

Yes, I'm aware that I wrote a blog post on [how scanf is bad and dangerous](/blog/100-days-day-1) in certain contexts. Sue me.  

Now we have to make our build folder to compile with CMake, but before that we'll have to write a text file called "CMakeLists.txt". This file will instruct CMake on a few things.

```
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.23)

project(cmake-test)

add_executable(cmake-test test.c)
```

cmake_minimum_required() won't let the user compile the code if their CMake isn't either in the version specified or in a newer one. You should set it to the oldest version that has all the features you use. If you are too lazy to do so, like me, just put the version that is running in your computer right now. This would be pretty bad for production, but on a learning repo it doesn't matter that much.  

The project line sets the project's name. It can recieve more arguments, like ```project(cmake-test VERSION 1.0)``` to set the version, but that's out of the scope of this tutorial. 

add_executable() adds executables. It recieves the name of the project to which you want to add executables and the files to compile. You can list more than one, like ```add_executable(cmake-test test.c main.c)```. 

Remember this won't link the test.c and main.c together, so you cannot use this line of code to add includes to a file. 

Now that we finished the basic CMakeList.txt file, we should create a build folder.

```
mkdir build
cd build
```

NOTE: your build folder doesn't need to be called build. 

Now let's create our makefiles. 

```
cmake ..
```

If all goes well, a bunch of stuff we are not going to read have been created on your build folder. Now all there's left is to build our code.

```
cmake --build .
```

Now check the folder. You'll see a binary file created called cmake-test (or whatever you named the project). You can run it as any other ELF (not the tall, skinny ones) executable.

```
./cmake-test

hello, cmake!
2 3
2 + 3 = 5 
```

Great, we learned how to compile a file using CMake! To finish it off, let's learn how to import headers/libraries with CMake.

Split the test.c file in three. test.c, add.c, and add.h.

test.c:
```
#include <stdio.h>
#include "add.h"

int main(int argc, char *argv[]){

    int n, m;
    printf("hello, cmake!\n");
    
    scanf("%d", &n);
    scanf("%d", &m);

    printf("%d + %d = %d", n, m, add(n, m));
    return 0;
}
```

add.h:
```
#ifndef ADD_H
#define ADD_H

int add(int x, int y);

#endif 
```

add.c:
```
int add(int x, int y){

    return x+y;
}
```

If the #ifndef witchcraft is foreign to you, check out [this older blog post](/blog/100-days-day-2).

Let's learn how to link add.c to test.c now. We just have to make some very simple changes to CMakeFile.txt:

```
cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.23)

project(cmake-test) 

add_executable(cmake-test test.c)

# add this!
add_library(
    add
    add.h
    add.c
) 

# and this!
target_link_libraries(cmake-test PRIVATE add)
```

add_library() will create a library called the first string, then you can add the files separated by a space. This doesn't work by itself though, you still have to link the library.  

target_link_libraries() does the trick. The first and the third argument are the project name and the library name. The second bit is what's weird. 

The second keyword can assume the following values: [PRIVATE, PUBLIC, INTERFACE]. This sets both the link interface and the link dependencies. 

PRIVATE means the library is used to implement the project, but someone who is using the project would not, in any way, have to use or interact with the library.

INTERFACE is basically the opposite case. The library isn't core on the implementation, actually it doesn't modify the project's main code in any way, but it provides useful defines/includes for code that calls the project. If your library is only headers, use the INTERFACE keyword.

If your library is both integral to the implementation of the project and it has headers/includes that the client needs to access, you should use the PUBLIC keyword, which combines both use cases.

Phew, now that you understand that, you're hereby allowed to compile the code the exact same way you compiled code without headers.

If you want to discuss anything, have any corrections or questions about this post, hit me up at arthurmpapp@gmail.com

See ya!

[next post](/blog/100-days-day-14)
